A Prayer to Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche
by Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche and Khenpo Chimé Rigdzin

gyurmé ché tsö tsompé ter la wang
Master over the never-changing treasury of debate, exposition, and composition,
khyentsé labpa sum gyi yönten dzok
With the qualities of love and wisdom and the three trainings perfectly complete,
pakyé pendé jungné rinpoche
Precious source of unfathomable benefit and happiness—
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

lokha chö la chokpa lamé drin
The guru’s kindness turned my mind toward the Dharma,
chö la gawa kyepa lamé drin
The guru’s kindness caused me to take delight in Dharma,
chö zuk mabor tsam di lamé drin
And if I haven’t abandoned the outward guise of a dharma practitioner—that too is the guru’s
kindness.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

tsé chik sangye drubpé lam gyi né
Having determined that the vital point for achieving enlightenment in a single lifetime
tsultrim mayin sherab tsöndrü min
Isn’t ethics, nor joyous effort, nor wisdom,
lamé mögü khonar takchö né
But that awakening is won only through devotion to the guru—
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

chö la jang tsön dul tsam ma jé kyang
Through the auspicious connection of strong devotion to a realized guru,
tokden lamar depé tendrel gyi
It’s possible to experience the highest wisdom
gongpa lha dang nyampé chewa yö
Without the slightest effort at practice.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

dikchen shenpa metsong tsul chal sok
Persons considered evil and immoral, like butchers and prostitutes,
tekpa shyen gyi duljar majarpa
Are not suitable for salvation in the lesser vehicles.
mögü lam gyi drolwé drubtob mang
Yet, many such adepts have been liberated through the path of guru devotion.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

khandrö sangdzö drubgyü shingta gyé
The secret treasury of the ḍākinīs and the eight chariots of accomplishment
kün kyang shyal tün kün gyi sangwé né
Are of a single voice in proclaiming reliance on guru yoga
lamé naljor khonar raklepé
As the secret and most crucial point of practice.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

mögü lam gyi tsawa ma tsuk na
You may spend your life behaving ethically and acting with restraint,
tsé gang dul trim tsangmé gyü dam kyang
But unless you’ve established the vital point of practice, the very root of the path, devotion
to the guru,
semgyü tamal mi lé mi pakpé
You’ll remain no better than an ordinary person.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

gyü sum lamé jinlab ma shyuk na
You may be learned in the sūtras, tantras and various sciences,
do ngak rikné kün la khé na yang
But, unless you’ve received the blessing of a guru who holds the three lineages,
dön gyü tokpa po gyu mi dukpé
The realization of the ultimate meaning will not transfer to you.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

lama lha ru kho tak ma chö na
You may recite many billions of mantras,
nyenpa dungchur drang mang dé na yang
But, unless you realize the guru and deity to be inseparable,
chok gi ngödrub tsé dir mi tobpé
You’ll not achieve the supreme accomplishment in this lifetime.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

depé drok dang yündu ma drok na
You may have been introduced to the genuine nature, the natural state of mind;
semnyi nyukmé neluk ngotrö kyang
However, unless this recognition is supported by faith as a constant companion,
nyamtok tsalkha chokmé mi gyepé
The power and expression of your experience and realization will lack direction and won’t increase.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

lama sangye nyi du ma shé na
You may offer prostrations, construct stūpas, and engage in many other virtuous deeds,
chakchö ten shyeng gejor chi jé kyang
But, unless you know the guru to be Buddha in person,
tsé chik dömé gyalsa mi zinpé
You won’t be able to capture the primordial stronghold in this lifetime.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

nyenpé sa khyab chegü tser sön kyang
You may have been born in opulence and heard your praises resounding throughout the world,
lamé kadrin yangyang ma dren na
But, unless you continually recall the guru’s kindness,
namdak lha chö lam du mi drowé
You’ll not progress on the path of the pure, divine Dharma.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

kyen ngen tok bab menpé sar lhung kyang
Unless you know how to revive yourself through faith,
depé kham dü so tsul ma shé na
A sudden onset of negative circumstances could send you on errant ways,
kyo dung yi ché sel khen mi dukpé
And there will be nothing to clear the pain, remorse and suffering.
dren chok rabsal dawar solwa deb
Supreme guide, Rabsal Dawa, I pray to you!

daré rang gi rangnyi ma lü na
Now I’ll not deceive myself:
sangye ngö dré lamé tukjé zin
My guru, you who are the Buddha in person, hold me in your compassion!
sem kyi tesa ten ji ri lé ling
You are the focal point of my life, stronger and more majestic even than a mountain.
khyen no khyen no rabsal dawa khyen
Care for me! Care for me! Rabsal Dawa, care for me!

za zi milam nang né khyé shyal ré
As if in a blurry dream, I find myself continually waiting to behold your face.
yangyang jalwar gukpé bu nga la
Whatever befalls me, be it pleasant or otherwise,
kyiduk chi jung resa shyen mepé
I have no other hope but you.
khyen no khyen no rabsal dawa khyen
Care for me! Care for me! Rabsal Dawa, care for me!

töpa ché yang drubpé nyamtok tra
There are those who study extensively yet lack practice and accomplishment,
tokpa to yang chö la jangwa chung
Or who display high realization but have no thorough training in Dharma.
dendra sam né khedrub nyiden pé
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
gyen druk chok nyi drawé lama dren
You who, like the six ornaments and two supreme ones, combine both learning and accomplishment.

ten dror mi sem rangdön shyiwa nyer
Some do not consider sentient beings or the teachings but pursue their own comfort.
ranggyü ma min shyendön drub lo jé
Their minds are not yet matured but they claim to act with genuine altruism.
dendra sam né dön nyi lhündrub pé
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
dzokpé sangye drawé lama dren
You who, like the perfect Buddha, spontaneously fulfilled the dual purpose.

dul trim chok zung ngak la möpa chung
Some see monastic discipline as supreme, and show little interest in mantra.
ngak la shyuk né dulwar güpa lhö
Others enter the path of mantra and then allow all other vows to lapse.
dendra sam né sumden dorjé dzin
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
pema karpo drawé lama dren
You, a vajra-holder with the three vows, just like Pema Karpo.

rabjung jezung khyimpé chö kal ché
For some, following a monastic life means giving up the lot of a lay person;
khyimpa jezung khepé bulob mé
While remaining a lay person precludes becoming a disciple of the learned.
dendra sam né khor tsok nam shyi gön
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
kün pen dawa drawé lama dren
You, protector of the four groups of disciples, benefactor of all, just like the moon.

kama shé kyang ter gyi chö kal mé
Some know the long lineage of kama, but lack the fortune to receive the short lineage of terma;
terchö mang yang kamé gyüpa mé
Whereas others hold many termas but do not possess the lineage of kama.
dendra sam né kater kün dzompé
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
dö jung bum zang drawé lama dren
You who resemble a wish-fulfilling vase filled entirely with kama and terma teachings.

rang luk chok zung shyen gyi chö la mö
Some consider their own way to be supreme, and belittle the ways of others;
shyen luk jé jö gyüpé chö kal bor
They parrot others’ ideas while casting the Dharma of the lineage aside.
dendra sam né tenpa yong kyi nyen
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru –
dzamling nyima drawé lama dren
You who care for all teachings, like the sun of the world.

nyendrak ché yang gyü la nyamtok mé
Fame and renown can entail a lack of experience and realization,
tokpa to yang dzepé drak gya chung
Whilst high realization doesn’t always mean recognition is forthcoming.
dendra sam né kham sum wangdü pé
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
khorlö gyur gyal drawé lama dren
You, like a wheel-turning monarch, in control of the three worlds.

chöpa zang yang jikten shé gya chung
There can be a fine Dharma practitioner who yet lacks worldly skill,
jikten khé kyang chö kyi nyamlen tra
Or a worldly person with great skill who yet has very little Dharma.
dendra sam né luk nyi kün dzompé
Reflecting on this makes me remember you, my guru—
depön zangpo drawé lama dren
You, like a fine captain, well versed and skilled in both Dharma and the world.

jinlab taktsen yö kyang mé kyang rung
No matter the circumstance, I completely accept your guidance
ngödrub kalwa tob rung ma tob rung
And will act on whatever advice you have given me, my protector.
dünmé tsé gya gönpo khyé la té
Whether or not the signs of blessing are manifest,
lam né gangla khor yang gyöpamé
And whether or not the fortune of accomplishment is won, I shall have no regret.

kyi na lamé jinlab nyi du sam
If I’m happy and my circumstances good, this is simply your blessing, my guru.
guyang nyamlu len shyin solwa deb
When relaxed, I may sing a little song of realization and prayer.
pendé dro la ngo shyin solwa deb
I pray to you, and dedicate everything to the benefit and happiness of all.
jam dang nyingjé kyewar jingyi lob
Bless me, that I may develop genuine love and compassion.

duk na drib jong ngödrub nyi du shé
If I’m unhappy and in difficulty, I see this as accomplishment, as former misdeeds purified.
nyamlen tsal jong jé shyin solwa deb
I pray to you, my guru: may I perfect my practice!
khorwé dukngal samshyin solwa deb
I pray to you: may I see the dissatisfactory nature of things.
kyoshé ngejung kyewar jingyi lob
Bless me, that I may develop weariness with saṃsāra, and strong renunciation.

kyepé lha gom depé ngak drang kün
All the practices of creation-phase yoga, deity meditation, mantra recitation and counting,
and the rest—
lamé mögü soldeb khona ru
They’re all to be found in the simple practice of guru devotion.
sok dom zer shyi né gak chik dril na
Herein lie all the crucial points of the four nails that bind the life-force of the practice.
gang nang lha ru charwar jingyi lob
Bless me, that I may see whatever appears as divine.

dangmé hang yik dechen lamé tuk
The subtle essence, haṃ, is none other than the great bliss of my guru’s heart.
mögü tummö kulwé tukjé lé
Moved by the tummo of devotion and compassionately flowing,
neyul khandrö drok dang lhenchik tu
It befriends the ḍākinīs of the sacred places and simultaneously brings forth the experience
of bliss and emptiness conjoined.
detong nyam tsal dzokpar jingyi lob
Bless me, that I may perfect the practice.

tsik la tenpé gowé dön mi tok
I may understand the words but fail to realize the meaning;
tsolwé chingwé gompé sa mi chö
Through effort-based meditation I remain bound, can’t realize the bhūmis.
zochö trö dang pang lang mi göpar
Bless me, that I may do without contrived elaborations,
nyintsen gom dang drepar jingyi lob
Able to meditate continuously, without acceptance or rejection, day and night.

deng né gön khyö gyé shyal nam jal tsé
Henceforth, whenever I think of your smiling face, my protector,
ngön jön drubtob gongmé namtar shyin
I will think back to the life stories of the realized masters.
tamal mi yi nangwa mi charwar
May I never behold you as an ordinary person—
lhakpé lha ru tongwar jingyi lob
Bless me, that I may see you as the supreme deity.

dorna di né kyewé trengwa ru
Essentially, from now on and in all lives to come,
gönpo khyé kyi gyé shyin jezung né
May I follow and please you, my protector;
tsé dang chö la barché mi jungwar
May there be no obstacles in my Dharma or in life;
tuk yi yermé drepar jingyi lob
Bless me, that my mind may merge indivisibly with your wisdom.

When I read Larung Gar Khenpo Chime Rigdzin’s “A Short Remembrance of, and Prayer to, My Master,
the Wish-Fulfilling Jewel, Khenchen Jigme Phuntsok Rinpoche, entitled ‘A Lament of Faith’,”1
I was greatly moved as it reminded me of my own guru and inspired great faith and
devotion in me. Here, with great respect, and for my own personal use, I, the one named [Shechen]
Rabjam Tulku, have simply replaced the name of the Wish-Fulfilling Jewel, Khenchen
Jigme Phuntsok Rinpoche, with that of my own guru, Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.

| Translated by Sean Price, 2019. Edited by Lhasey Lotsawa (Libby Hogg and Stefan Mang), 2022.
Published here with the kind permission of Rabjam Rinpoche.

Version: 2.0-20220207
↑ https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/khenpo-chime-rigdzin/lament-of-faith